---
layout: post
title: R "Modules"
subtitle: A middle ground for re-using R code between "packages" and the "source" function
---

These days I write most of my code in R.  All things being equal, I'd really rather not.  But I work in biology and most of my colleagues and collaborators use R, so it's easier to do the same.

One of the things I really miss from python is that every script that I write can be essentially treated like a full fledged "package" is treated in R.  That is, if I start writing some ad-hoc code in a script and then decide there's some part of it I want to re-use later in another script I can just write
```python
import adhoc_script

bar = adhoc_script.load_function()
bar = adhoc_script.useful_processing_function(bar)
```

and everything works as you'd hope it would.  Importantly, it doesn't matter if I have defined `load_function` in my current session as importing from `adhoc_script.py` doesn't overwrite anything (i.e., `adhoc_script` gets its own namespace).

Handling of namespaces are one of the areas where R is really awful to work with, but you can get most of this behaviour by bundling the ad-hoc script to be reused into an R [package](http://kbroman.org/pkg_primer).  Unfortunately every time I do this I have to:
1. Add the scaffolding necessary for an R package.  I've published multiple packages and I still find this extremely non-trivial.  There are whole [books written about how best to do this](http://r-pkgs.had.co.nz/).
2. Install the package.
3. Load the package into my current session.

There are tools that make turning scripts into package a bit more automated and less painful, but this is still a long way from what I really want.  Conflicting names are still an issue as the expectation of the user when they load the package is that all the functions that were in `adhoc_script.R` should be in the main namespace.  That is, our new script should look like
```R
library(adhoc_srcipt)

bar = load_function()
bar = useful_processing_function(bar)
```

We can get around this somewhat by not calling `library` directly and writing `adhoc_script::load_function()` instead, but the syntax is clunky and it has other limitations.  Far more restrictive for my purposes is that if I want to make some minor change to `adhoc_script.R` and then use that change in my current interactive session or script I need to re-install the package and then reload it.  In the end, I've been doing what I suspect most people do and use the `source` command instead.  That is, I just run `source(adhoc_script.R)` and the code is run line for line as if I'd copied and pasted it wherever I'm running `source` from.

This sort of works, I don't have to build any special scaffolding to re-use my code and I can just re-run `source` if I change anything.  But I'm still stuck with the name conflict issue and the whole thing is generally inelegant.  After a couple of hours of googling and trying different options, I've come up with a compromise I'm sort of happy with.

The central idea is to use the `sys.source` function which does the same thing as `source` except it runs the code inside a separate "environment" which you are free to specify.  [Environments](http://adv-r.had.co.nz/Environments.html) in R are a complicated topic in their own right, but for my purposes they're just a way to run the code loaded via `source` in a way that it's walled off from whatever else it is I'm doing while still allowing me to access the bits I need to.  I wrote a function to hide all the business of calling `sys.source` from an environment , which ends up pretty close to what I want.  After loading [this function](https://gist.github.com/constantAmateur/cfea655803e72c84ec3979d2e5338893), I can do
```R
import(adhoc_script)

bar = adhoc_script$load_function()
bar = adhoc_script$useful_processing_function(bar)
```
If I change `adhoc_script.R` I just need to run `import(adhoc_function)` again.  I don't need to worry about naming conflicts as they're all nicely fenced off.  I can even mimic most of the other nice features of python imports.  For example,
```R
import(adhoc_script,as='ahs')

bar = ahs$load_function()
proc_dat = ahs$useful_processing_function
bar = proc_dat(bar)
```
and if I really must load everything into the current environment
```R
import(adhoc_script,all=TRUE)

bar = load_function()
```

It's still far from perfect and I'm not 100% sure I haven't made some horrible mistake in how I treat environments.  But I'm much happier doing this than bumbling along using `source` which was in practice what I was doing previously.  You can download the source code [here](https://gist.github.com/constantAmateur/cfea655803e72c84ec3979d2e5338893).  I stick it in my `~/.Rprofile` file so it is run every time I start R. 

